---
layout: post
title: Maps and Mapathons
categories: [community-events, general, class]
tags: [community-events, class, GIS]
shortview: true
---

# Community Event: Humanitarian Mapathon

This week I went to a GIS event: a [Humanitarian Mapathon](http://blogs.lib.unc.edu/news/index.php/2015/10/mapathon/)! 
I've always been interested in GIS - 
cartography! data! pretty visualizations! - but I don't have any training (formal or informal) in that area. 

November 16th was GIS Day, and the [Research Hub](http://library.unc.edu/hub/) here at UNC 
had a whole host of events scheduled around it.
Luckily, many of these did not require any expertise with mapping software or statistics or geography. 
I selected the mapathon because it seemed like a fun way to spend a few hours while learning a valuable
skill and helping people through a campus workshop!

This event was set up to help the [Humanitarian OpenStreetMap project](https://hotosm.org/), which is an 
open source project aimed at helping communities and areas in crisis by providing free, current maps 
that can then be used efficiently by aid workers and other relief organizations on the ground. Since a lot of the world (particularly
in developing areas) remains largely unmapped (and even if it is, natural disasters like earthquakes or hurricanes
can really change the geography of a place, thus rendering any respectable map made before a 
disaster obsolete), this is a project that can both help the people in those places and further our understanding of the areas 
in question. Humanitarian OpenStreetMap grew out of the open source OpenStreetMap, and started after the 2010 earthquake in Haiti. 
It has since grown to work on projects in many parts of the world. 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Phwrgb16oEM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Mapping sounds complicated but is actually pretty simple! 
First, volunteers work together (often in events like these mapathons and/or with similar humanitarian organizations like 
[Missing Maps](http://www.missingmaps.org/)), taking satellite images and identifying structures, 
roads, buildings, and the like. The information is then relayed to another group of volunteers on the ground, who verify
findings and add to the map. It takes time, but at the end of the process a complete map is produced! 

This event was directed by a geography student and was held in Davis Library's Research Hub.
We did a quick overview of the technology we'd be using and why it was needed and then got to work!

The area we were mapping is in [Malawi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malawi), and we were using satelite photos and 
imagery to try and identify specific features. Looking at specific grids on the map, we used simple ID tags to point out buildings
(sometimes recognizable by the ethereal blue glow of a building with a tin roof - very eerie), roads,
paths, and others. We used a simple ID editor while mapping, but there are other ways to map in OpenStreetMap. 
JOSM (Java OpenStreetMap) is another
editor used (in my view) by more experienced/professional mappers. 
Once the map was tagged, we saved it and then it went to community workers who look at 
the map and the ID tags and try to verify our findings. In the end we will have a clean and useful
map for aid workers and others who need to move quickly through an area to get to people! 

I mapped two small grids for our area - I was surprised that both were fairly sparse! Mostly brush and footpaths, with a few
buildings that were clustered around one another. 
It was cool to see the area from above, and interesting to listen in on our conversations
with each other - is this a rock? A round hut? Would this be a dividing line for crops or an actual residential
road? - as we tried to decipher what we were seeing. I'm sure I made a few mistakes, but that's why we
have multiple steps in the process, and also why most of the work on OSM is done in groups - as a unit,
we can pool ideas and divide work so - hopefully - we get better results.

All in all, I had fun. I'll be on the lookout for other GIS (beginner-friendly) events in the future.
