---
layout: post
title: My First Official Post!
categories: [general, class, the authoress]
tags: [class]
---

Sometimes in class we learn stuff really fast! I find it is best to reorient myself with a few basic commands. For example, often I go to add a change and find myself confronted with an unfriendly `fatal: pathspec '_config.yml' did not match any files` message. 
Clearly, I am in the wrong directory! A simple `pwd` command tells me where I am, `ls` reminds me of the files and extra things contained in my working directory, and a `cd` will, eventually, get me there and capable of adding and commiting a change.
Not only are these basic commands that are good for every user to know, they restore my confidence in myself and my ability to navigate the strange seas of computers and coding and text!

The best way to go about it is practice, practice, practice. After all, *repetitio est mater studiorum* (my father always translated this differently as "repetition is the mother of memory" but "study" works just as well).

So, what have we learned in class? 

Things we have covered | Thoughts
---------------------- | -------------------------
Web structure basics | Still a bit fuzzy but a lot better than it was!
Cloud9, GitHub | Where were these resources when I was first learning about how websites are made? Just created/not created yet.
HTML, CSS, Markdown | Markdown is **fabulous** although I still have to delete all the stubborn html junk from my brain and replace it with superior tools.

<br> 

And what should I practice?

Things I should do:
* Read the advanced tutorials
* Code more often
* Ask when unsure

After all, even though I am not an avid Gilmore Girls fan, Rory has the meat of the nut here:

<iframe src="//giphy.com/embed/26BRJbetNC9kKdD4Q?html5=true" width="480" height="262" frameBorder="0" class="giphy-embed" allowFullScreen></iframe><p><a href="https://giphy.com/gifs/rory-gilmore-know-it-all-i-like-knowing-things-26BRJbetNC9kKdD4Q">via GIPHY</a></p>
